Introduction to Physical Therapy and Patient Skills?

APPENDIX D: Standards of Ethical Conduct for the Physical Therapist Assistant

INTRODUCTION
PREAMBLE
The Standards of Ethical Conduct for the Physical Therapist Assistant (Standards of Ethical Conduct) delineate the ethical obligations of all physical therapist assistants as determined by the House of Delegates of the American Physical Therapy Association (APTA). The Standards of Ethical Conduct provide a foundation for conduct to which all physical therapist assistants shall adhere. Fundamental to the Standards of Ethical Conduct is the special obligation of physical therapist assistants to enable patients/clients to achieve greater independence, health and wellness, and enhanced quality of life.
No document that delineates ethical standards can address every situation. Physical therapist assistants are encouraged to seek additional advice or consultation in instances where the guidance of the Standards of Ethical Conduct may not be definitive.
STANDARDS
Standard #1: Physical therapist assistants shall respect the inherent dignity, and rights, of all individuals.
 1A. Physical therapist assistants shall act in a respectful manner toward each person regardless of age, gender, race, nationality, religion, ethnicity, social or economic status, sexual orientation, health condition, or disability.
 1B. Physical therapist assistants shall recognize their personal biases and shall not discriminate against others in the provision of physical therapy services.
Standard #2: Physical therapist assistants shall be trustworthy and compassionate in addressing the rights and needs of patients/clients.  2A. Physical therapist assistants shall act in the best interests of patients/clients over the interests of the physical therapist assistant.
 2B. Physical therapist assistants shall provide physical therapy interventions with compassionate and caring behaviors that incorporate the individual and cultural differences of patients/clients.
 2C. Physical therapist assistants shall provide patients/clients with information regarding the interventions they provide.
 2D. Physical therapist assistants shall protect confidential patient/client information and, in collaboration with the physical therapist, may disclose confidential information to appropriate authorities only when allowed or as required by law.
Standard #3: Physical therapist assistants shall make sound decisions in collaboration with the physical therapist and within the boundaries established by laws and regulations.
 3A. Physical therapist assistants shall make objective decisions in the patient's/client's best interest in all practice settings.
 3B. Physical therapist assistants shall be guided by information about best practice regarding physical therapy interventions.
 3C. Physical therapist assistants shall make decisions based upon their level of competence and consistent with patient/client values.



 3D. Physical therapist assistants shall not engage in conflicts of interest that interfere with making sound decisions.
 3E. Physical therapist assistants shall provide physical therapy services under the direction and supervision of a physical therapist and shall communicate with the physical therapist when patient/client status requires modifications to the established plan of care.
Standard #4: Physical therapist assistants shall demonstrate integrity in their relationships with patients/clients, families, colleagues, students, other health care providers, employers, payers, and the public.
 4A. Physical therapist assistants shall provide truthful, accurate, and relevant information and shall not make misleading representations.
 4B. Physical therapist assistants shall not exploit persons over whom they have supervisory, evaluative or other authority (eg, patients/clients, students, supervisees, research participants, or employees).
 4C. Physical therapist assistants shall discourage misconduct by health care professionals and report illegal or unethical acts to the relevant authority, when appropriate.
 4D. Physical therapist assistants shall report suspected cases of abuse involving children or vulnerable adults to the supervising physical therapist and the appropriate authority, subject to law.
 4E. Physical therapist assistants shall not engage in any sexual relationship with any of their patients/clients, supervisees, or students.  4F. Physical therapist assistants shall not harass anyone verbally, physically, emotionally, or sexually.
Standard #5: Physical therapist assistants shall fulfill their legal and ethical obligations.
 5A. Physical therapist assistants shall comply with applicable local, state, and federal laws and regulations.
 5B. Physical therapist assistants shall support the supervisory role of the physical therapist to ensure quality care and promote patient/client safety.
 5C. Physical therapist assistants involved in research shall abide by accepted standards governing protection of research participants.
 5D. Physical therapist assistants shall encourage colleagues with physical, psychological, or substance related impairments that may adversely impact their professional responsibilities to seek assistance or counsel.
 5E. Physical therapist assistants who have knowledge that a colleague is unable to perform their professional responsibilities with reasonable skill and safety shall report this information to the appropriate authority.
Standard #6: Physical therapist assistants shall enhance their competence through the lifelong acquisition and refinement of knowledge, skills, and abilities.
 6A. Physical therapist assistants shall achieve and maintain clinical competence.
 6B. Physical therapist assistants shall engage in lifelong learning consistent with changes in their roles and responsibilities and advances in the practice of physical therapy.
 6C. Physical therapist assistants shall support practice environments that support career development and lifelong learning.
Standard #7: Physical therapist assistants shall support organizational behaviors and business practices that benefit patients/clients and society.  7A. Physical therapist assistants shall promote work environments that support ethical and accountable decision making.
 7B. Physical therapist assistants shall not accept gifts or other considerations that influence or give an appearance of influencing their decisions.
 7C. Physical therapist assistants shall fully disclose any financial interest they have in products or services that they recommend to patients/clients.



 7D. Physical therapist assistants shall ensure that documentation for their interventions accurately reflects the nature and extent of the services provided.
 7E. Physical therapist assistants shall refrain from employment arrangements, or other arrangements, that prevent physical therapist assistants from fulfilling ethical obligations to patients/clients.
Standard #8: Physical therapist assistants shall participate in efforts to meet the health needs of people locally, nationally, or globally.
 8A. Physical therapist assistants shall support organizations that meet the health needs of people who are economically disadvantaged, uninsured, and underinsured.
 8B. Physical therapist assistants shall advocate for people with impairments, activity limitations, participation restrictions, and disabilities in order to promote their participation in community and society.
 8C. Physical therapist assistants shall be responsible stewards of health care resources by collaborating with physical therapists in order to avoid over utilization or under utilization of physical therapy services.
 8D. Physical therapist assistants shall educate members of the public about the benefits of physical therapy.




